From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes. Oh, weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number four Oh eight.
Recorded live Thursday, January 23rd, 2014. This
episode of Hansel minutes is
brought to you by telephone.
Offering the best in developer
tools and support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklin.net makers
of gesture pack a powerful
gesture, recording and recognition system
for Microsoft connect for windows
developers details. Add gesture P
k.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Rodney Aleen about
SAS JS. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes and
I'm on with Rodney grim
claim. How do you say
your last name, sir? So
that's exactly what I said.
I'm on with Skype and
Skype. You're in Germany right
now and I'm actually going
to be in Germany in
a couple of weeks, so
we'll have to hang out.
Oh, great. Where are you
by your staying? Let me
see the name. It's boston.net.
And the name of the
hotel is the NCA. Here's
another German word. I'm a
lousy German here. Maritime Ryan
main hotel in Darmstadt Marie
team. Mine hotel in line.
Yes. I'm sorry. I have
no, I'm a lousy German
for someone with a German
last name. I have no
German language abilities at all.
You know, what's quite hilarious
about that hotel. What's that?
That's the hotel I live
in you. Okay. First you
live in a hotel. That's
pretty awesome. Well, depends. Yeah,
but yeah, I live in
a hotel five days a
week. Okay. Cause you work
there because you kind of
commute. Exactly. Okay. And you
live in this hotel in
that very hotel. So I'm
getting, I'm going to present
at a conference in your
hotel. That's awesome. That's very
Donald Trump. Quite a coincidence. Okay.
Well then we'll have to
have you come and hang
out and then, then gosh,
you should be speaking at
this conference, frankly. That way
you would just go downstairs
and present. I'm just saying
we can hook that up.
No, you don't want to
go downstairs to present at
the conference. No, that's like
the first floor, you know,
I live on the seventh.
I don't, I don't go
down to the first floor
all that off. Nah, you're
not going to slum with
us on the first floor.
So you work at Deutsche
telecom and you're a front
end web developer and you've
got some really great stuff
on your, on your GitHub.
I, I enjoy wandering around
and kind of like low
key stalking. People's get hub
accounts and checking out what
they, what they're committing on.
And it looks here like
a week or two ago
you did something called SAS
dot JS. You basically compiled
lib SAS to JavaScript the
other week. Is that, is
that correct? Yep. Can we
break this down into a
couple of pieces here? Because
I think that some of
the folks that listen to
my show, focus on windows
a little bit more than
on Linux and JavaScript and,
and kind of Mac tools.
So they may or may
not be familiar with some
of these, these, these different
tools that plug in together
now is this SAS is
an in lesson. SAS. We
think of those things as
like less than SAS. It's
the Jack JavaScript. Sorry. The
CSS pre compiler Zass. Yes.
Okay. And in lessons in
Zass are kind of competitors,
would you say, is that
true? Yes. Why are they
always want that? But why
are they always said like,
as if they're one thing,
why do people always go
with us and SAS less
than SAS? Because it's a,
what, what they really think
about is the idea of
pre processing, the CSS, having
some sort of a secondary
syntax to actually generate the
CSS And the existence of
tools like this, the idea
that you need a pre
compiler for CSS. Do you
think that that's a vote
of no confidence against CSS
itself? Is this a way
of us saying CSS? Doesn't
do what we need it
to do. It's not a
good spec. So we're going
to change it. No, no,
definitely not. It's more a
manifestation of us developers being
lazy. We like to automate
things. We don't like to
repeat ourselves. We like to
write tourers scripts instead of
the verbose stuff, a browse
of wood would need. So
that's, that's the reason we
created those tools. Do you
think that that's something that
people just have to do?
I mean, because it seems
to me that you could
sit down and write front
end web apps with raw
vanilla Java script and regular
old CSS. But, but any
large system inevitably has a
CSS, pre compiler, and very
often has something like coffee,
script TypeScript, or some thing
that compiles or transpiles to
JavaScript. So we no longer
are okay with just using
the stuff that browser gave
us. We feel like we
have to step back a
level. We've done this, not
just with SAS, but also
with JavaScript itself. This is
just all laziness that drives
that. Yeah. In a way.
Yes, I think so. I
liked to write vanilla JavaScript.
So I'm not going to
a pitch about coffee script
and that stuff all too
much. But when, when it
comes to CSS using a
pre compiler, such as Zass
allows me to structure my
code much efficiently, I can
use multiple files and have
that processed at some built
step into one single file.
Now I want to send
a single file to the
browser because of the network
overhead. Right. But I don't
want to develop in one
single file. Also. I would
like to break down structures
like more complex CSS, selectors.
I would like to want
not repeat them all the
time, but reuse stuff, declare
variables and, and use those
values instead of having to
ride the same hex code
for the same color all
over my CSS. So that's
the reason we use these
tools. And do you think
that there, one of them
will win, like in that
way, that jQuery kind of
arguably one, you know, before,
before we had more standards
based internet, when we needed
jQuery to exist, jQuery kind
of one, do you think
that lessons ass will one
of them will become the
de facto one that everyone
will use or will there
always be different pre compilers?
Honestly, I have no idea.
I've never used less. I've
never used stylists or myth
or any of the other
tools. The only thing I've
used is vanilla CSS and
Zass doesn't really matter. Yeah.
That's a good point. Cause
you know, our standards are
evolving. One of the key
reasons to use a pre
compiler is to have variables
like the thing, not to
repeat yourself with the color
definitions over font sizes or
whatever. That's like, I have
one spot where you tweak
a value and it reflects
throughout the whole CSS file.
That is stuff we're going
to get natively in a
CSS as well. That's the
CSS values they're called differently.
They're a, I don't remember.
She has those values. Sure.
Variables, whatever they will come
to the browser and they
will be much more powerful
than what the CSS preprocessor
can offer us today. That's
like, you know, 10 years
away from actually being usable.
Right, right. It's definitely fun
to see the kinds of
exploration that people do. And
the kinds of hacking that
people do that is all
as a response to the
web standards. Body's not moving
fast enough. Basically the internet
is going to make it
happen. Whether the web standards
people will make it happen
or not. Yes. There has
been a shift in thinking
actually it used to be
the way that they write
standards and we use them.
Now we've reached a point
where we can actually create
our own tools and have
the standards bodies copy them.
It's like in, in JavaScript,
you have the query select
nowadays, right? There's this function
where you can pop in
a CSS selector and get
a bunch of dumb nodes
out of it. That is
the standards replication of Jay
Curry's sizzle, the engine that
John Reznik wrote back in
the days. Right? So that's
how things are well working
out nowadays, we create stuff,
we try out stuff and
whatever proves itself will be
embodied in a standard at
some point. Yeah. And it's
a much better way to
do things other than waiting
for a year or two
or three for a standard
to come out. And then
finding that the standard is,
is somehow wanting is unacceptable.
We're trying different things. And
the one that is the
best, the one that rises
to the top presumably then
becomes the de facto standard.
And then in this case,
he comes an actual standard,
which is a good thing.
Exactly. So Zack, you're saying
Zass, like there's a Zed,
a Z in the front.
Is that how we say
this? I've been saying it
wrong all these years. I
have no idea. We call
it Zass. Okay. SAS, SAS
is that. So it was
originally written in Ruby. This
preprocessing language for CSS and
then from people have basically
taken this kind of spec
for, for SAS and ported
it to different things. And
what I think is fun
about the thing that you
did is that so SAS
was written originally in Ruby
and then people are making
other implementations of this and
then live SAS. You can
see it. Lip sas.org is
a C slash C plus
plus port of, of SAS.
And that is that that
implementation is up on, on
GitHub. And I think it's
maintained by Hampton Catlin, then
there's node sass, which allows
you to do things like
tell node to call this
native versions of his bindings
for that. And then what
you've done is you've used
a thing called N scripting
and scripting rather, and you
is this right? You compiled
the lib SAS version to
JavaScript. Exactly. And did you
just do this because I
mean, what, what is the
value of this? Because this
is a fascinating thing because
it's it's, so it's such
a representative thing of all
the little tools that we
can plug in different ways
to see what's good. What's
bad. Why we would want
to do this. Why would
want to do that? Okay.
So We were discussing, running
a Zass, a compiler in
the browser, and to do
that, we would need a
JavaScript implementation of it. Right
now. We didn't want to
actually implement as, as pauses
because others have tried and
they have failed in, in
keeping it up to date.
I mean the, the STSS
J S implementation, hasn't seen
an update in two years,
so that's not really going
to work, especially not for
people like us who are
constantly working on things. And
don't really have the time
to put into maintenance necessary
to, to actually keep those
projects alive. So what we
wanted to do besides checking
out M script and obviously
was make our lives easy.
I was like, I wanted
to just press a button
and get the newest lips
ass compiled, JavaScript then, and
be done with it. It's
like release a new version
in, in five minutes. That
was the goal. Okay. And
that's what we did. M
scripting is a Mozilla project
and it's I a compiler
that translates LLVM to JavaScript.
Okay. LLVM is I have
no idea. I think it's
like lightweight virtual machine. I'll
look it up. So basically
the, the C plus plus
code is translated to a
LLVM and LLVM bite code
is translated to JavaScript. And
M scripting is a Python
tool, I think. And the,
besides like translating the code
Java script, which probably is
quite easy. It has to
do a bunch of things
that aren't that easy, which
is emulating the subsystems. It's
like in, in C plus,
plus you can access the
memory. It's like, you can
allocate, like, I don't know,
three kilobytes of Ram to
do whatever you want to
do with it. Like you
get this address and you
can, you can manipulate the
Ram directly. You can't do
that in JavaScript. We don't,
we don't have access like
that. Right. So M script
and provides a, an, an
environment where it emulates memory.
It does that by defining
a type array, which is
one of the newer additions
to a JavaScript came in
with the canvas, I think,
which is it's, it's simply,
well, a type, the rate
doesn't take any values. It
takes only values of a
certain type. So it's a
constrained array, right? Exactly. You,
you would say Value can
have a, I don't know,
32 bits, that'd be like
a thing you can easily
map to memory, right? So
that that's the idea to
get blazing, fast access. You
need to dumb it down
for the, for the computer
dump, By constraining the types
by, by, by going against
JavaScript, which is very tight,
tight, tight, loose, for lack
of a better way of
phrasing it by constraining it
you're, you're, you're more appropriately
and more performantly simulating the,
the, you know, on an
actual typed array of bytes
or of, or whatever. So
LLI VM, which I guess
doesn't really mean anything now,
but originally meant low level
virtual machine is this compiler
infrastructure, the C plus plus
compiler infrastructure that gives you
the optimization of all of
these different kinds of programs.
And that is what M
script builds on top of.
So then you're, you're literally
taking lib SAS, which is
written in CV, a C
plus plus, and compiling it
into a, is it fair
to say a style of
JavaScript? Well, I would call
it a subset of JavaScript.
It's it's JavaScript. All right.
But it's only using a
very specific part of the
language, right? There is very
much of a bite shifting
by the operations Bitwise operators
in, in use. So you
will, you wouldn't write JavaScript
like that. So it's not
what we call one. It's
not idiomatic JavaScript. You are
not going to look at
this and say, Oh, I
can totally see what they're
doing here. It's probably looks
like it's, Can't not none.
I'll forget it. Forget it.
It's, it's a cryptic stuff.
You can't make sense of
it, but it's JavaScript. And
it's, it's a subset Mozilla
calls, ASM, ASM dot JS.
Exactly. Which they, again, can
compile in a way that
can be run extremely fast.
I think they're getting it
down to a two times
native speed or something. Wow.
So it's extremely fast for
JavaScript. It's it's blowing, blowing
you away. And we just
did with the, this C
plus plus library lips ass,
what Mozilla did with I
picked Citadel. Yeah, I think,
yeah. You can see that@unrealengine.com
slash HTML five, it's basically
the Citadel demo in the
browser. I've seen it running
at 60 frames a second.
It's it's unreal. And literally
is unreal. You're wandering around
in a three D world
and it's done entirely in
JavaScript. Well, Surely it's not
done in JavaScript. It's done
in C plus plus. Well,
yeah, but you're correct. It's,
It's compiled to JavaScript so
it can run in your
browser. And that is the
new black That is the
new black. I love that.
Yeah. I mean like you,
you corrected me appropriately. It's
written in C plus, plus
it is thought about in
C plus plus, but the,
the, the byte code is
this, this low level subset
of JavaScript and, you know,
spider monkey is this engine
inside of, of Mozilla. And
then Odin monkey is this
project name for this optimizing
compiler. So what they do
is they take this as
and dot JS and they
say, all right, if we
know that we're targeting this
subset of JavaScript, then we,
and we know this is
what our goal is. We
can optimize this JavaScript differently
than the JavaScript that you
write idiomatically. And that allows
them to just optimize the
hell out of it. It's
really, really amazing. So then
it makes sense that JavaScript
really is the assembly language
for the web at this
point. I mean, it's the
closest thing we have. It's
been called that quite a
number of times. Yes. Do
you think that that's okay,
like, is this, is, is
this just a bunch of
experiments or do you really
think that this means that
JavaScript and Silverlight and Java
rather, and Silverlight, and flash,
these virtual machine plugins are
just no longer needed. We
have a virtual machine it's
in the browser and it
is JavaScript. Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
I would say that I'll
virtual machine for the web
is JavaScript. Definitely. So then,
so then you went and
you took the N M
script and lib says the
result of compiling lips as
through this and script and
library. And then what did
you, what did you kind
of wrap around it? You
put this on a convenience
API around it. Yes. So
what you get out of
em, scripting is the, the
environment and your C plus
plus code in JavaScript. You
can call it in a
quite ugly way actually. And
I didn't, I didn't want
to, to use that and
I didn't want to distribute
that. So we wrote a
convenience API on top of
it, especially since M script
and the script and environment
also provides the, the a
pile system. So any a
C application, any C plus
plus application that relies on,
on the file system being
present can, can actually run
in the browser as well.
And lips ass or Zass
can access other files. It
can include, or actually import
other files. And I wanted
that feature in the browser
as well. So we used
the simulate fire system I'm
script and gave us, and
just made it usable is
just like one function call,
right file. Give it a
name, give it some content.
And that's it not hassle
with, is that director directory
really available? Do we need
to create it? Other permissions
in, in order is whatever.
No, it's just this very
high level, write it and
be done with it. So,
so in SAS, you can
go and say at import
Fu and that'll do file
system access, and it'll give
you the flexibility, like you
said before to have different
files and, you know, a
nice build system. And then
the result is one, you
know, one CSS file. So
you're saying that you map
that file system access to
two to two URL access
to just HTP access. Not
quite we have a demo
for that, but we didn't
follow through with it. Cause
at some point we actually
had to get back to
our regular day jobs, what
we did an ABL or
we, we created everything necessary
to do just that, that
you could link to one
Zass file and it would
just resolve every import. It,
it finds because of flee,
like it would do on
the, on the file system.
We didn't implement it all
the way through, but it's
definitely possible. And so the
result of this now is
that you've got both the
ability to go and say
jazz dot compile, you know,
in JavaScript in the browser,
either synchronously or asynchronously using
workers too. And what is
the point of this? Like
to what end is this?
Just an example of like
a great example of how
we can plug all the
Lego pieces together that the
world has given us into
something different, or what value
do you think that this
provides? Like, how is this
making your, your day job
better? It doesn't, I mean,
we're not using Zass JS
at, at the office. I
created it to prove a
point. I live on really
crappy internet. I'm a web
developer. I live on the
internet, but my connection usually
is quite bad. I live
in a hotel, you know,
hotel, wifi usually sucks. So
I fall back to my
3g, which usually sucks as
well. And when I'm home,
I have a one ambit
line, which sucks. So I'm
very far away from, from
the internet. Most of my
not working day, which means
I don't like network latency
all that much. I wanted
to use tools like JS
bin or JS fiddle or
dabbler or whatever you, you
name it and not send
everything I do to a
central server. I have it
processed there and send the
results back down to me,
but have it processed in
my browser. Cause you know,
I'm working on a freaking
Mac book pro this thing
has power. Why not use
it? That's interesting. So the
talk that I'm going to
give in your hotel is
going to talk about this
idea that we're really not
pushing the browser as much
as we should. And I
talk a little bit about
this idea that there's a
lot of machines and virtual
machines in the cloud, whether
it be Amazon or Azure
or wherever we're hosting our
stuff at. And we we'd
like to scale those virtual
machines up on the backend,
but we, I think we
forget that we've got either
dual or quad core machines
on the client side. And
if we, if we assume,
like we talked about a
minute ago, that these are
virtual machines, maybe we could
push these machines a little,
a little more. Now you've
got a Mac book pro
I've got an iPhone. How
appropriate are solutions like this
in an iPhone? Can I
run in script and eyes,
JavaScript on an iPhone and,
and, and gain the benefits
of it. It will run.
It just won't run as
fast. It really depends on
what you're trying to achieve.
If you want independence from,
from the network, it's the
only way to actually go.
If you want to reduce
the traffic on your backend,
it's a trade off. Really.
It's like, you know, you
can't reliably figure out what
a system, the browser's running
on that you can, but
how much power it has.
That's an interesting point. I
never thought about that. Like
I might, you know, we
have like responsive design and
adaptive frameworks, but from a
JavaScript perspective, you know, like
for example, if you've got
two megabytes of minified and
script and Java script, you
might want to know ahead
of time, whether this is
going to a Mac book
pro or whether this is
going to an iPhone or
an old Android device, because
it could destroy the device.
You know, it could be
like smoke and fire coming
out of the phone at
this point. Yes. Figuratively. Yes.
A mobile browser can only
take so much data. Cause
it only has so much
Ram. I mean, my MacBook
has 16 gigs of memory.
I can do anything I
want on this machine, but
my, my iPhone, I'm not
sure. Does it have a
gig? Yeah. I think it's
a gig. But even then
what's available to you really?
Exactly. Even if you have
a gig of memory on
the device, how much memory
does your browser have? And
from that memory, the browser
has how much memory is
allowed for your website. It's
like, it's really not that
much. And you also need
to keep in mind that
every image you load is
stored in memory as well.
So there's not that much
stuff to go around, But
at the same time, we
still see websites, big corporate
websites that do sorting of
lists of a couple of
hundred items on the server
side. You know, surely there
must be some line in
the sand that we can
draw that says, yeah, if
you're going to start five
or 600 items, bring that
down as JavaScript and let
them put the phones sorted
rather than send view, state
back to the server and
sorted on a web farm
and then bring the HTML
back. It really depends on
the amount of data you're
talking about. But preferably you
would do sorting on the
device, not on a server
unless you're talking like millions
of records of things. If
you're talking about hundreds, do
it on the problem. Yeah,
absolutely. I always like using
dot JS and I
try to see how far
I can push D three
and things like it on
the, on the phone. Like
I, I keep coming upon
old websites that do reporting
and stuff and they either
do the reporting and the
charts in, in flash, which
of course does me no
good on my, on my
phone. Or they generate the
PNG on the server side
and then send me a
custom PNG. And I think
that using either D three
or some chart or some
SVG based chart engine inside
of the phone is going
to be a much better
than generating some huge PNG
and then sending it across
the wire like that. That's
kind of my go to
example, not only, Only that
consider what you can do
with SVG, it's interactive. You,
you can, you can actually
animate it. You can drill
down into content. You can
do all sorts of amazing
stuff. A PNG, just cats
that at one point you
just can't do that on
your back end. You want
that interactive stuff to happen
in the browser. And if
you've reached that point, there
really isn't a way to
do anything on the backend
anymore. No, I know that
you said that you'd like
to do vanilla JavaScript. Do
you write SVG yourself as
well? Do you write vanilla
SVG? It really depends on
what I'm doing. I would
rather write SVG as a
file. Then use some JavaScript
library if I don't have
to, but it really depends
on am I looking at
an icon or something, or
am I looking at a
very complex structure that needs
animation and stuff, then There
isn't a way around constructing
for stuff in JavaScript. Right?
Right. What people can learn
more about the stuff that
you've built, like your I
dot JS and you know,
smarty template engine awhile back
all up@medializeddotgithub.com. I'm going to
put all of this information
in the show notes, as
well as your really interesting
blog post about why you
did this SAS dot JS
and in response to actually
leave a ruse, a kind
of speculative tweet about, I
wonder if there is a
JavaScript version of SAS and
then you were apparently in
the hotel room with your
buddy and you guys decided
to just make it. And
I thought that the, the
blog post is a really
interesting as you call it
incident report about this exploration
and why you did it.
It's pretty fascinating reading. I'll
put that in the show
notes as well. Thanks for,
for chatting with me today.
My pleasure. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
.